Preface
Before there were computers, there were algorithms. But now that there are computers, there are even more algorithms, and algorithms lie at the heart of computing.
This book provides a comprehensive introduction to the modern study of computer algorithms. It presents many algorithms and covers them in considerable
depth, yet makes their design and analysis accessible to all levels of readers. We
have tried to keep explanations elementary without sacrificing depth of coverage
or mathematical rigor.
Each chapter presents an algorithm, a design technique, an application area, or a
related topic. Algorithms are described in English and in a pseudocode designed to
be readable by anyone who has done a little programming. The book contains 244
figures—many with multiple parts—illustrating how the algorithms work. Since
we emphasize efficiency as a design criterion, we include careful analyses of the
running times of all our algorithms.
The text is intended primarily for use in undergraduate or graduate courses in
algorithms or data structures. Because it discusses engineering issues in algorithm
design, as well as mathematical aspects, it is equally well suited for self-study by
technical professionals.
In this, the third edition, we have once again updated the entire book. The
changes cover a broad spectrum, including new chapters, revised pseudocode, and
a more active writing style.
To the teacher
We have designed this book to be both versatile and complete. You should find it
useful for a variety of courses, from an undergraduate course in data structures up
through a graduate course in algorithms. Because we have provided considerably
more material than can fit in a typical one-term course, you can consider this book
to be a “buffet” or “smorgasbord” from which you can pick and choose the material
that best supports the course you wish to teach.
You should find it easy to organize your course around just the chapters you
need. We have made chapters relatively self-contained, so that you need not worry
about an unexpected and unnecessary dependence of one chapter on another. Each
chapter presents the easier material first and the more difficult material later, with
section boundaries marking natural stopping points. In an undergraduate course,
you might use only the earlier sections from a chapter; in a graduate course, you
might cover the entire chapter.
We have included 957 exercises and 158 problems. Each section ends with exercises, and each chapter ends with problems. The exercises are generally short questions that test basic mastery of the material. Some are simple self-check thought
exercises, whereas others are more substantial and are suitable as assigned homework. The problems are more elaborate case studies that often introduce new material; they often consist of several questions that lead the student through the steps
required to arrive at a solution.
Departing from our practice in previous editions of this book, we have made
publicly available solutions to some, but by no means all, of the problems and exercises. Our Web site, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, links to these solutions.
You will want to check this site to make sure that it does not contain the solution to
an exercise or problem that you plan to assign. We expect the set of solutions that
we post to grow slowly over time, so you will need to check it each time you teach
the course.
We have starred (*) the sections and exercises that are more suitable for graduate
students than for undergraduates. A starred section is not necessarily more difficult than an unstarred one, but it may require an understanding of more advanced
mathematics. Likewise, starred exercises may require an advanced background or
more than average creativity.

To the student
We hope that this textbook provides you with an enjoyable introduction to the
field of algorithms. We have attempted to make every algorithm accessible and
interesting. To help you when you encounter unfamiliar or difficult algorithms, we
describe each one in a step-by-step manner. We also provide careful explanations
of the mathematics needed to understand the analysis of the algorithms. If you
already have some familiarity with a topic, you will find the chapters organized so
that you can skim introductory sections and proceed quickly to the more advanced
material.
This is a large book, and your class will probably cover only a portion of its
material. We have tried, however, to make this a book that will be useful to you
now as a course textbook and also later in your career as a mathematical desk
reference or an engineering handbook.